♫

(Introduce self and stuff if not introduced already)

Hi, I'm Manish. I work on Servo, and have been involved in the Rust community for three years now.

I'm going to talk about how we can be more "open", as in "welcoming", in our community.


♫

So, Open Source. In the past, a lot of software was proprietary. Folks had to pay licensing fees to
get anything done. Our industry had an issue with the _availability_ of software, and out of this
grew the free software and open source movements. These movements were focused on making software
_available_; making it so that you could obtain copies of the software and source code with reduced
or no restrictions.

While there's always more work to be done, this goal has largely succeeded. It's pretty easy to find
open source versions of some software or a library. A lot of the software we use on a day to day
basis is open source or heavily reliant on open source components. It's amazing.

As open as these projects are to their code being used, they're not necessarily as open -- as in
"welcoming" -- to contributions. Sure, they're happy to accept patches from experienced
contributors, but for inexperienced newcomers it's often _very_ nontrivial to get involved.

I feel like this should change. I feel like people wanting to participate should be aided in doing so.

So, I want to show you how your open source projects can be _welcoming_, not just _available_.

♫

I'd like to take a moment to just say that the Rust community -- all of you, and the thousands of
others not here right now -- is one of the most welcoming online communities I've ever seen. People
are patient, empathetic, and helpful.

My goal is for us to be even better 😀

♫
Why should one bother to do this?

¶ Really, I just feel that it's the right thing. But I'm sure not everyone agrees
with me on this. So I'm going to give some other good reasons.

One of the most common arguments against making projects more accessible is that
"serious contributors can deal with this, and we don't care about the rest". It's
an attitude that tries to be practical -- but it's flawed. Serious contributors
rarely start out serious; they start out curious. If they encounter friction;
they may decide to try something else. This isn't limited to inexperienced
programmers; it happens with everyone. While some things in this talk will be specific to
inexperienced contributors, most techniques here are not, and help experienced
programmers get involved as well.

¶ It usually doesn't take that much effort. It takes an hour or so to set up things
like a contributing file. Mentoring an issue usually takes between zero and twice
the amount of time you would need to fix it yourself.


¶ Ultimately, it ends up being worth it. In my experience, whatever time you
put into this more than recoups itself when being welcoming ends up in adding
long-term contributors to the team.

♫
One example of this is Servo. Servo's an experimental browser engine in Rust, and in my opinion
it's an extremely welcoming open source project. We do tons of mentoring, and as a result we have a
very vibrant community of contributors, many of whom started off as complete novices and now
regularly make large and impactful contributions. Servo's a very ambitious project, and it would
not have progressed as much as it has if not for these contributors.

We now are in a situation where _too many_ new contributors is a problem. We file good first bugs,
and they get snapped up quickly. We keep running out! This happens so often that Simon invented
a term for it:

♫
the E-Easy piranhas.

♫

Another example is Clippy. Clippy is a linting tool for Rust used by a lot of folks. For _some
reason_ people who use Rust really enjoy being scolded by the compiler so much that they want to opt
in to extra scoldings. 🤷

Clippy started off as a small, not-very-serious project. I liked messing with compiler internals,
and this was an opportunity for me to do just that. But folks started using it, and feature requests
were piling up. A very enthusiastic ¶ Andre became a co maintainer when he wrote his own collection
of lints which we merged together.

Still, with two people, the project was progressing quite slowly. Issues kept piling up, and neither
of us had the time to sit down and write a ton of lints, even if we wanted to. It was a cool
project, but it was ... small. This is a problem so many open source maintainers have; they have
cool stuff they want to work on, but time is limited and priorities exist.

One day I decided to try and make it easier to contribute to clippy. I've benefited a lot from
random open source projects helping me learn, and wanted to give back. We had ¶ 24 lints at the time.

I sat down and did a couple of things. I wrote a CONTRIBUTING file which provided tips for working on
the repository. I urged people to ask questions in the file. I also went and tagged every issue on the
repo as easy, medium, or hard. And I shared the CONTRIBUTING file with the community. This didn't take
much effort. Nor did mentoring the people who arrived.

In one month, our quiet little repo had ¶ 59 lints, and 19 contributors. People kept dropping by,
wanting to learn and contribute. We had one contributor, Georg, who made some very high-impact contributions,
and we added him as a maintainer.

Over time, we had a steady stream of contributions. We added ¶ Martin, and ¶ Oliver as maintainers. We now ¶
have a ton of lints, and new ones being added all the time. Folks have often used clippy as a stepping stone
for hacking on rustc.

These days I don't have the time to hack on clippy, but thanks to my amazing co-maintainers and the community,
the project is chugging along and becoming better every day. None of this would have happened if we hadn't
put the effort into making clippy welcoming and accessible for contributions.

♫

...Anyway. All of this is to say that putting some effort into opening up your project can go a long
way.

Let's see _how_ we can do this effectively.

♫

Given a random issue on your repo, it's unlikely that a newcomer -- experienced or otherwise, will
understand what's going on. Most issues require a lot of unstated context such that only existing
contributors will be able to make sense of what's required to be done.

It's very helpful for all new contributors if they have a way to find issues that are suitable for
them to work on. Having an "easy bug" tag, or a discoverable page consolidating these issues, helps
immensely.

These bugs will often be ¶ bite sized tasks. It's better to tag more involved bugs as "medium" or
"less easy". Easy bugs are not hard to create. If you notice something you want to refactor, file an easy
bug! When working on something, if there are optional extras you want to add, try and ¶ extract them
as self contained tasks and file easy bugs on those. It would be easier to just fix them now, sure, but there's
a chance of a much bigger payoff if you help someone else fix it. Always be on the lookout for chunks
of work like this that you can break off; I find that these are everywhere.

¶ Don't make critical bugs into easy issues. If something needs to be solved soon, having it blocked
on a newcomer is a recipe for unhappiness all around. You may end up pressurising the contributor
to get the patch done, or end up doing it yourself while they are still working on it, which
will leave a bad taste in their mouth.

On the other hand, try to make the bugs impactful! People love to see that their patch will
positively affect many others!

It's good to ¶ provide context in these bugs. Link to the relevant code, and possibly to existing
code solving a similar problem. Mention tests that they should get passing. Give some pointers on
where to get started.

If you have a lot of similar tasks, ¶ consolidate the common bits into a guide that you can link to
from each bug.

¶ Always solicit questions in these bugs. Make people know that it's okay to ask questions, and they
will!

¶ Contributions don't need to be limited to code! Pure documentation fixes can be quite valuable,
and you open yourself up to contributors who prefer doing technical writing. rustc has a whole host
of contributors mainly focused on docs, who do some stellar work. Even infrastructure
work, that is, fixing CI, build configs, etc, can be made into easy bugs. Servo does this and we get
frequent contributions. We even have an experienced contributor who put significant effort into
completely revamping how our infrastructure works and making it much better.

♫
Document everything. These are questions you'll get asked anyway, better write them down once.
This both saves your time and aids people who are too intimidated to ask questions.

Make sure your ¶ README.md is up to date with ¶ build info. The nice thing about Rust is that it's
usually just `cargo build`, but if you have weird steps or prerequisites, document them. Also,
make sure you prominently link to ¶ your contributions file.

On that note, ¶ create a CONTRIBUTING.md, where you can put the bulk of the info for new
contributors. The ¶ patch workflow is probably one of the most important things to put in it; this
helps both experienced and new contributors. It's very important you don't miss anything here! A few
months ago, I wanted to fix some things in a somewhat well-known established open source tool. I had
patches ready to go, and I went to look for how I could submit them. They had a contributing file,
which went in excruciating detail on various things. It had a large section on coding style. It had
another large section on the style, length, and possibly color of your commit messages. Plenty of
information, but they completely forgot to mention how patches were to be submitted! They just
expected you to ... know. Ultimately, after some googling, I found their patch mailing list and
submitted a patch, but there were some issues getting that to work too, which require foreknowledge
that could have been made clear in the contributing file. It was a rather frustrating
experience and I went from wanting to maybe make some more involved patches to not really
wanting to touch the project again, even to just fix the shoddy documentation that caused this issue
in the first place.

Aside from the patch workflow, ¶ link to places where discussions happen, and where questions can be
asked. This can be IRC, mailing lists, or even just the issue tracker. Encourage questions!

¶ Include some information on how the tests work. ¶ Have an overview of the codebase so that
it's easier for people to find things. ¶ Link to the API docs of your codebase and libraries it uses.

¶ Include a code of conduct if you don't have one already. Make it clear that certain kinds of behavior
are not okay on your project.

¶ Github has a neat feature where you can pre-fill issue and pull request bodies with templates.
Servo uses these templates to provide checklists for contributors, to remind them to do certain
things whilst submitting. This helps automate away having to ask contributors to do things like
run tests.

♫

One of the most common sources of friction for newcomers is overcomplicated contribution processes.
Usually, these processes exist for a reason. Complicated projects need complicated review tools
and complicated issue trackers.

But for most new contributions, parts of these processes seem unnecessary, and don't provide
anything other than friction.

For example, in Servo we use an excellent review tool called Reviewable. It handles rebases well and
lets you keep track of review progress. It's great.

But it's also a very complicated tool. It takes quite a while to get used to. I still get confused
with some of its features.

But we don't require people to use this; the tool is optional and gets used only for large pull requests.
Cool review tools aren't really necessary for small ones, so we don't use it there, and it's
one less tool that newcomers have to learn.

Similarly, the OpenSSL project used to use a mailing list for patches, but they also allowed
pull requests on GitHub. They've since switched entirely to GitHub, it seems.

For clippy we often fix up contributor pull requests before merging instead of asking them to make
minor stylistic fixes, and simply noting that we did so. It's great to be able to make a perfect
pull request, but there's no reason they need to learn to do that up front.

In general it's always nice to make such bits of process optional or provide alternatives.
As a contributor gets more involved, they'll be able to learn these things at a relaxed pace.

♫
So, you've got someone on your issue tracker wanting help fixing a bug. Of course
you should answer their questions, but what else is involved in mentoring?

¶ First, try to approach it as if you are their companion discovering the codebase along with them.
For example, if you were to answer a question about the codebase, help them understand the process
by which they could discover that answer themselves by walking through it. Instead of just giving
them a code snippet, show them how some code elsewhere is doing a similar thing and how you can
modify that code to be useful here too. Using "we" instead of "you" also helps. I've found that this
attitude dispels a lot of the apprehension people have when approaching open source projects --
you're more of a friend than a mentor.

¶ Be clear in setting expectations. If you're too busy to be able to help them well, let them know!
A lot of people are afraid of asking questions, and the lack of a response can signal that you think
their question was too stupid to warrant a reply, which is a very discouraging sentiment that you
don't want to inadvertently cause. Always respond, even if it is to say that you will be giving
a full response later.

¶ Mentoring doesn't have to be 1 on 1. It's nicer when all maintainers are helping out, popping in
and out of an issue to help the folks working on them. This spreads out the work and the new
contributor becomes comfortable with your community. Just be careful that nobody falls through the
cracks in such a process.

¶ Follow up! If a new contributor just landed a patch, point them to a similar but more
involved bug as a next step. If you don't have one, remember to ping them the next time you see one.
This makes them know you care, and keeps them engaged.

♫
It's important to understand where your contributors are coming from. One of the most
common mistakes and sources of frustration is assuming that everyone thinks like you
and shares your experiences.

Open source mentorship is an opportunity to experience different ways of thinking, almost
first-hand. It's an opportunity to become a better teacher, and of course improve
someone else's programming skills in the process.

All of this requires empathy.

Be patient with your mentees. Avoid ¶expecting things from them; for example,
sometimes they may not be familiar with the ¶ tools you use. In clippy we've
had a couple of great contributions from people who were able to easily make the fix on their own,
but had great trouble figuring out how Github worked.
Other times they may not be familiar with the
¶ programming language. In Servo we get a lot of folks new to Rust who want to learn Rust through
open source. We still get really great contributions from these folks. Of course, sometimes
you want to require familiarity with the language for an involved issue; but in that
case you should make expectations clear in the bug itself.

¶ For better or for worse, a project will usually have a primary language of communication.
Not everyone will be fluent!

Finally, ¶ use inclusive language! Avoid using phrases like "just do X". While the task may seem
simple to you, there may be complexities that you have ignored because you're used to the task. It's
very hard to put yourself completely in their shoes -- so don't assume you have. It's very discouraging
when someone tells you to "just do X" or "simply do X" and you find out that it's hard.

♫
I'd sort of like to tie this all together by pitching a dream I have. It's a dream I hope you adopt as your own.

¶ All open source -- no, wait, that's a bit too ambitious, let's try again. The ¶ _Rust community_,

(such dream much wow)

---

(to prep for next slide, because it is very nice and should not be spoiled in advance)

As I said before, I really think that being welcoming in open source is just the right thing to do,
though there are other valid reasons one may wish to do the same.

I'm going to leave you all with a wonderful quote from Toni Morrison that helps motivate why I feel that way.

♫

(read quote)

